---
layout: post
title:  Media That Has Made Me Who I Am
date:   2020-08-21 15:01:35 +0300
image:  media/media.jpg
tags:   Blog
---

Obviously, each of these works influenced me at most by ~0.5% on an imaginary scale. That still is a lot in my opinion for just reading a book or watching a movie. I'm going to try to optimize for works with a maximum influence per obviousness ratio. For example, Star Wars obviously affected me a lot but it affected everyone else too, so it isn't a particularly interesting work to list here.

#### Books

* Arthur Clarke's short stories - Scifi in it's purest form - Blew my mind as a kid. Singlehandedly inspired me to learn how technology works and got me excited for the future.

* Matterhorn - Vietnam war novel - There but for the grace of God go I. It was an experience reading this.

* How To Be A Victorian - A historical book detailing how Victorians actually lived - Opened my eyes to how people in the past weren't any different from us today, they just operated under different incentives and constraints.

* The Short Happy Life of Francis Macomber - Short story by Hemingway about courage - I read this at a pivotal time in my teenage years when I was taking on a more risk-taking attitude.

#### Movies

* The Secret Life of Walter Mitty - Man goes from daydreamer to global adventurer - Seriously influenced me to become more adventurous as a person.

* Tampopo - A Japanese ramen western - It inspired me to take food more seriously. It has an outsized effect on me anyways, I might as well give it the respect it calls for.

#### TV Shows

* Mad Men - A show about an ad agency in the 60's - The only show where I felt like I KNEW the characters. I haven't ever rewatched it because my memory of watching it the first time is so mindblowing.

#### Games

* The Total War series - Historical RTS games set in Feudal Japan/Fall of Rome etc - Inspired my love of history.
