---
layout: post
title:  Krakow Pro Tips
date:   2023-05-23 15:01:35 +0300
image:  krakow/krakow.jpg
tags:   Blog
---

## Food

[Bar mleczny "Pod Temidą"](https://goo.gl/maps/3JgsXuXmUoo97vX3A) What Polish home food is sorta like. Probably the closest you’ll get to a home cooked meal.

[Sausages from the blue Nysa](https://goo.gl/maps/ZToD3KjikgKn9Di4A). Sausage from a truck. Halal cart vibes

Try the KFC in Poland. Goes harder than it should. Get the Grander - warning though, it comes with bacon.

[Nota_Resto by Tomasz Leśniak](https://goo.gl/maps/vJxd3M81Q133YSBh7). Solid fancy food. Not Polish food. 

[Cukiernia Michałek](https://goo.gl/maps/YGD1hvuVtCeDvMhw8). Best pastry shop ever. Get the donuts, W-Z cake, or really anything else, it’s amazingly good.

[Pod Wawelem Kompania Kuflowa](https://goo.gl/maps/UKZLdHAMZk8gnXP28). This place has pretty decent food. Touristy.

[Brasserie L'Olympique](https://goo.gl/maps/cJ2FCBgHCZZGoUeR6). More fancy food, very tasty, very cheap because Poland. Highly recommend it. Not Polish food.

[Jarema Restaurant](https://goo.gl/maps/4eDBYYWFuwymVii98). Eastern Polish food. Somewhat fancy place. Very good. 

## Sights

Castle - Obvious. Try to get a tour. The best tours are the Armoury and the Royal Private Apartments. Note that the tours sell out relatively quickly, so show up early, get tickets, come back later for the tour. Or don’t, just walking around is fine as well. 

Rynek - Obvious as well. Hard to miss lol. See the St. Mary’s Basilica.

Auschwitz - I recommend going, although be prepared for very heavy vibes obviously. All day kinda thing.

Wieliczka - Also cool, also an all day thing. Family friendly and very impressive. 

Nowa Huta - If you’re interested in Communism go, otherwise feel free to skip. 

The Princes Czartoryski Museum - Recommended, top Krakow museum IMO, worth going.

Polish Aviation Museum - I have a soft spot for this place because I have a hard on for airplanes. Otherwise, skip because it’s just warplanes sitting around.

Collegium Maius - Take a peek. You don’t have to do the tour, but it’s cool to stop by and take a look for a bit. College building from the 14th Century.

Cmentarz Rakowicki - I recommend taking a look if you’re looking to chill out. It’s a graveyard but it’s super pleasant compared to the American ones. I like going to just look at people’s graves and just enjoy nature. I know it sounds weird but trust me it’s nice. 

Kleparz - Outdoor meat and produce market. Cool to see. Very high quality vegetables. <15 minutes and I like it. It’s like if a farmers market was actually good and not overpriced. 

## Shit to do

The free walking tours. They have colorful umbrellas. I’ve always been very impressed with their quality. Please skip the tour where they drive you around in a golf cart. 

Have a beer at a cafe on the Rynek. Laugh at the British tourists making asses of themselves.

Walk around the Old Town. The side streets are super cool. Kazimierz is also interesting to walk through.

Walk into random churches. Krakow has way too fucking many and they’re all beautiful.

